hey everyone how's it going la Isla
Montgomery again today's episode covers
the life of coral crow yeah I know you
probably never heard of them I didn't
either one of my listeners sent me the
suggestion and frankly I had never heard
of them so I looked for a month on the
Google and after a cursory glance I said
this would be a great future topic and
when I searched for books on Carl crow I
really struck gold british author and
fascinating China expert Paul French
wrote this book called Carl crow a tough
old China hand the lifetimes and
adventures of an American and Shanghai
that was published by hong kong
university press in 2006 i ordered it on
amazon and this is the primary source
that i'll be using to tell this story
this is sort of like that sir robert
hart podcast episode chp 58 by the time
we finish you're going to be asking
yourself why have I never heard of this
guy before our story takes place between
1911 in 1937 about 26 years you'll know
from previous episodes the China history
podcast that China had seen better times
than the first two quarter centuries of
the 20th century in the early part of
the 20th century the Western powers in
Japan were to a great extent running
roughshod all over China basking in the
afterglow of all the unequal treaties
and enjoying the full advantage of a
toothless and unpopular government to
the north between the time Carl crow
landed in Shanghai in July 1911 and when
he left as the Japanese bombs came
raining down on the city in 1937 trying
to begin to transform itself and he had
nice courtside seats to watch it all
happen 1920s and 30s Shanghai is a time
that has inspired legends and has left
behind stories that have captured the
imagination and interest of
millions in nineteen twenty nineteen
thirty Shanghai that was Karl crows
world Herbert Carol crow came from the
show me state born in Highland Missouri
September 26th 1883 the year the world
first saw electric street lights
Missouri back then was not as bustling
as it as today was still known as the
Gateway to the Wild West like gansu
province during the Silk Road in China
once you pass through the state of
Missouri the only thing out there was
the great unknown Carl crows father died
when he was 16 and like most kids back
then in the same predicament he had to
leave school and go out and earn a
living his fate would have it he ended
up in the printing business and learned
the ropes as an apprentice to various
shops at 19 he founded his own newspaper
and sold it for a sufficient enough
profit to go to college up in Minnesota
and then back to Missouri where he
worked as a printer to support himself
through school he studied journalism
which was something just starting to be
taught in colleges he left after less
than a year and didn't graduate Becky
didn't attend too many classes either as
his work for the newspaper took up most
if not all of his time from there he
moved to Texas and worked at the Fort
Worth star-telegram there he learned
more about what makes a newspaper
successful he learned about how to
sensationalize news and create headlines
that sold papers he spent some time in
Mexico and got his first taste of living
outside the friendly confines of the
United States he supplemented his income
by becoming a writer and was even
writing stories for the venerable
Saturday Evening Post well you know how
life is suddenly one day out of nowhere
1910 Carl crow gets an offer to help set
up a newspaper in Shanghai called the
China press the loop off it was a
project led by another great journalist
and native son of Missouri named Walter
Williams very interesting life but won't
get into it here now 1910 the
is a decade after the Boxer Rebellion so
China had earned a reputation in the US
as a wild nation where an American could
easily get his throat slit and pockets
cleaned out by some robber it was
considered a wild and dangerous place
and as Carol crow later wrote he didn't
know back then if he got to China from
missourah via the Atlantic or the
Pacific jun 19 11 he sets out this was
three years after Sir Robert Hart had
left after nearly half a century of
service in China Carl crow arrived the
following month and right away he's
earning the equivalent of three hundred
dollars a month covering the diplomatic
beat his fellow missourian and the one
who got him into this mess Tom milord he
served as editor in chief this newspaper
the China press this was the first
American style newspaper in Shanghai so
summer of nineteen eleven you all know
what's going to happen the place is
about to explode the wu chun uprising is
less than a few months away but young
Carl crow from southern Missouri he's
just shy of his 28th birthday working at
a newspaper where he had to wear a dozen
hats not to mention find local stories
to write and then get them printed day
in day out the offices started off on su
chuan road off the Bund and later out of
14 jo Jung Road which today has got to
be some of the priciest real estate in
the world one block off the Shanghai
Bund in a block south of the fabled
Nanjing East Road that's where their
offices were and they advertise their
paper in this way the China press every
year readers and advertisers alike are
demonstrating their increasing
confidence in the value of the China
press as a recorder of the world's news
and as an unrivaled publicity medium
throughout China if you are not already
a subscriber to the China press you may
not be aware of the many new features
which contribute to make this the
leading daily journal in China among
these are improved editorials color
printing and an excellently produced
pictorial supplement on Sundays
subscription rates six months $15 12
months twenty eight dollars out port and
foreign posted extra it was a struggling
startup and they ran the paper by the
seat of their pants because of his
printing background Carl crow got his
hands stained with printing ink right
alongside the Chinese press operators
Shanghai in 1911 head yet become the
mythical Shanghai of the 1920s it was a
town that was definitely going places
but hadn't gone anywhere just yet so the
kind of news that really sold newspapers
wasn't that easy to find but the hard
work paid off and circulation began to
get some traction by the time the China
press was selling 4,500 papers a day
they were profitable the first
investment made was in a new high-speed
printing press the machine was so fast
and so state-of-the-art that they were
able to run other companies print jobs
when they weren't using the machine to
run the China press their stance was
unapologetically pro-chinese and they
all shared altruistic visions that this
paper could serve as some sort of a
bridge between the US and China if
Shanghai didn't have enough hard news to
make interesting headlines Carl crow
decided he would go out and find them
himself 1911 the Yangtze River the
chang-jung had a massive flood the
government was in shambles and they did
nothing to respond to the disaster the
suffering of those affected over a
hundred thousand killed and millions
left homeless ho-hum no big deal not
press-worthy as far as the established
Western press and Shanghai was concerned
the China press thought otherwise they
thought there'd be a future in reporting
local China news they were right Carl
crow took a 660 mile journey up the
river parts of which were to wider than
a lake because of the floods and mingled
with the locals and reported the misery
caused by the flooding and this was one
of
I'll crows passions going out to these
faraway places far from shanghai
guangzhou beijing nanjing 10 jincheng
doll all the treaty ports going deep
into the countryside and seeing what was
going on there and reporting what he saw
and heard to the people of the USA if
the news wasn't coming to the China
press they'd go out and find it but on
double 10-day 1911 we have the will
Chang uprising the traditional line of
demarcation that sort of spelled the end
of the Manchus as a ruling force in
China that story came to Carl crow via
telegram direct from Hong Kong which is
one of the cities and that make up Bo
wuhan and this provided the paper with
the boost they needed and Carl crow
wrote all the news that was fit to print
about the fall of the Ching dynasty and
the establishment and earliest moments
of the Republic of China he got to
interview Sun yat-sen and mingled with
many of the leaders of the movement crow
spent the early years of the Republic's
existence with gusto he traveled to
Nanjing placed a full-time correspondent
there chase down news and events as they
happened such as the formation of the
Republic Sun yat-sen's selection is the
first president the writing of a
constitution UN shark eyes elevation to
the presidency and his later betrayal
and all that messy affair you all
remember from previous podcast episodes
that the transition from qing dynasty to
Republic of China was not a smooth and
orderly one and ultimately the whole
place degraded into the warlord era and
Carl crow was parked right in Shanghai
just as Shanghai was beginning to stand
up and become noticed other than as a
place to conduct trade commerce and
we're british american french and
japanese expats all enjoyed the benefits
of being the big guys with their cushy
life styles and extraterritoriality and
Carl crow he was like the rest of these
expats living the good life golfing
having drinks at the
Club and all the other perks that even
to this day many Westerners get to enjoy
living in Asia but he separated himself
from many Colonials in the way he viewed
China and the Chinese he had that
fascination that would not allow him to
look down on the Chinese or dismiss any
aspect of their culture Carl crow became
a student who found all the differences
and similarities between Chinese and
Western fascinating it became a lifelong
student of figuring out these ways to
bridge these differences an interesting
point Paul french mentions in his book
you know after the Republic of China was
established the capital was moved to
Nanjing but because of the times and the
uncertainties and foreign governments
skepticism that this whole Republic of
China thing was going to work no one
moved their embassy to Nanjing all the
diplomats remained in Beijing because
they thought who the heck knows if
another again sure kai is gonna come
around or some warlord and this time
successfully establish a new imperial
dynasty and they were right though it
didn't work out like they thought so the
foreign embassies remained in Beijing
and if they wanted to interact with the
Nationalist government they had to head
down in Nanjing so Carl crows interview
in Nanjing with sun yat-sen allowed the
China press to gain a lot of
respectability and prove they were you
know no fly-by-night outfit there was a
solid professional core of Missouri
bread management and an ongoing
relationship with the School of
Journalism there at the University of
Missouri they were committed and serious
in their pursuit to make this scrappy
american-style newspaper the leading
English language paper in Shanghai in
addition to his work as a newspaper man
Carl crow is also a prolific writer of
books as well he left behind a slew of
titles that all had to do with
explaining China and the Chinese to an
eager American audience who couldn't get
enough of
all the news and wonders of that faraway
land his first book was titled the
travelers handbook for China the title
of which sorta gives it away as to what
the book was about it was a sort of like
the folders guidebook of its day and
indispensable to the China traveler well
the warlord era in China we all remember
it was every warlord for himself it
started in earnest upon you ensure Kai's
death in 1916 and lasted till the
northern expedition cleaned them all out
1928 Carl crow figured out how to get
around during these turbulent times at
the end of nineteen twelve twenty
nine-year-old Carl crow went and got
himself hitched he married one of the
staff of the China press Mildred powers
they honeymooned first in manila this
brief stop in the philippines yielded
another book in 1914 titled america and
the philippines yet the carl crows book
she never had to guess with content was
about he knew how to title a book from
manila they sailed to San Francisco New
York and Europe Egypt and Pakistan and
then back to the US to deal with a
family crisis and for young Carl crow to
enjoy little fame and fortune you see
his reports from China and having
established himself as a budding China
hand really got Carl crow included into
the who's who of luminaries from the
show me state by Christmas 1913 Carl and
Mildred crow were in Tokyo where they
lived in Akasaka not too far from the
Imperial Palace there he lived and
worked as a business manager for an
English daily there and within six
months World War one began Carl crow
figured out right quick that Japan's
intentions back then were anything but
honorable as we know Japan was by this
time a highly militaristic society they
had their sights on China and how best
to plunder that place and get
way with it Carl crow saw this up close
and personal that he was henceforth
anything but sympathetic to the Japanese
his third book published in 1916 was
titled Japan and America a contrast he
saw firsthand how Japan was up to its
eyeballs and all the push and pull
between former Ching Imperial loyalists
and those committed to the Republic
Japan played both sides off against one
another both Sun yat-sen and the Ching
loyalists needed Japan's supporting one
form or another the land of the rising
suns intentions were always self-serving
and Carl crow was one of the early ones
to see this in write home about it he
remained distrustful of the Japanese for
pretty much all his time out there and
had been quite vocal in warning
Americans about Japan's evil intentions
out in the Far East during World War one
Carl crow worked in Japan for a stretch
he was business manager as I said for
the for a paper there that Japan
advertiser in addition to this he served
as a reporter as well in Shanghai and in
Tokyo Carl crow also wrote stories for
the United Press a 19-15 Carl perot
played a small role in a rather great
and historic moment in Chinese history
if you recall in February 1915 Japan's
ambassador tried to Palm off the
twenty-one demands on China and when
they first presented the demands in
January they warned the Chinese if you
dare blab about what's contained in
these demands were gonna clobber you but
the demands were so outrageous even
Japan back down and they gave another
version in February and Valentine's Day
now the 21 demands we looked at these in
detail sort of in CHP episode 45 where
we looked at the aftermath of the
Shanghai revolution you know what sort
of happened right afterwards well the
twenty-one demands is one of the things
that happened and if you recall Russia
which is still an empire at this point
they didn't like them either
the Bolshevik Revolution still hadn't
happened just quite yet so as told by
Carl crow in his book I speak for the
Chinese which which he penned just
before he left China in 1937 the
Russians leaked the document that their
secret police had come by through one
nefarious means or another and they
picked Karl crow to be there leaker and
Carl crow duly reported on the
twenty-one demands which you could read
all the analyses you want but anyone
with any common sense can conclude these
twenty-one demands spoke for themselves
as far as outrageousness went so Carl
crow played us some small part in
Fanning the flames of outrage that all
people felt about Japan and this was
later reflected in all kinds of strikes
boycotts and protests crow left Japan
and early 1950s shortly after his expos
on the twenty-one demands and returned
to New York via the trans-siberian
railway to London this was a trip that
he later summarized in one word as
uneventful he arrived in New York in
July 1915 and from there headed out west
to California and became a fruit rancher
about 30 miles outside of San Francisco
but before he headed out west Carl crow
traded for a bit on his fame and
notoriety as China hand and all-around
adventurer journalist raconteur who knew
how to give a good speech or a good
interview there's all kinds of evidence
and suspicions that one of carl crows
weaknesses was his desire to be
perceived as perhaps more than he was
which already wasn't so bad so he's
suspected at times of being an
embellisher he more than most knew what
the American public liked to read or
hear let me quote from Paul French's
book page 72 where Carl crow is profiled
in the New York world a newspaper of the
time the smallish man with the glasses
and ready laughs is Carl crow his
Chinese name is Cao Lu years spent in
on newspaper work and in Mexico and
India have supplied him with many tales
of peculiar experiences particularly in
China where things are a bit different
his rooms upstairs are choked with
swords and carved camphor wood boxes
while the latter are in turn filled with
silks and hangings of various kinds one
of his cherished possessions as a
magnificent ermine robe and muff worn by
an empress of the celestial Empire who
lived centuries before the Christian era
began in 1917 the u.s. entered World War
one and Carl crow volunteered for the
army and add 34 years old and with all
these experiences overseas behind him
the usg figured they could get some use
out of him but after doing a little
background checking the government found
that Carl crow had unbeknownst to him
been in regular contact with a German
spy a woman it was one of those things
he didn't know it at the time but later
on it all came out and he had been an
unwitting aide to a known and later
captured German spy well he sort of
goofed there but the whole affair
certainly made an interesting inclusion
into his life story well fate brought
Karl crow his wife and new baby daughter
back to China this time it was a posting
with an outfit called com-pub or the
Committee on Public Information he was
the representative for them out in China
his portfolio was propaganda his work on
behalf of compa was supposed to have the
right pro-american slant of how things
were unfolding so that's what he did
during those years in China then came
the Treaty of Versailles and China's
further humiliation followed by that
watershed in modern Chinese history the
May fourth movement in 1919 Carroll crow
caught a nice break he had a major hand
in the publishing marketing and sales of
a collection of speeches by President
Woodrow Wilson to make a long story
short
as boring as the subject matter sounds
so heated was the debate on the betrayal
of the Western powers after the Treaty
of Versailles there actually was a huge
demand for this Chinese translated texts
of all these speeches that Wilson gave
so Carol crow made a killing on this
deal what the Lufthansa heist was to
Henry Hill in goodfellas that's what
this was to Carl crow our topic for
today now Carl brought a little bit of
good old Missouri common sense to this
whole world of western journalism in
China Carl crow sent out postcards to
all known American missionaries out in
the hinterlands ostensibly this was to
ask them to help get the word out about
this book on Wilson speeches to all
these far-flung places a million miles
away from the world of these tree deport
areas these missionaries attack this
project with so much gusto that after
Carol crow had received all their
feedback sent in more detail than one
could hope for Carl crow is able to
create the first direct mailing list in
China done deal just like that and Carl
crow looked at what he suddenly had and
knew the value it held let's just say
Carl crow had pretty much always sided
with the Chinese he was that type of guy
you were Chinese you wanted to convince
some how unfair this or that treatment
was no need you were already preaching
to the choir his political and personal
slants were always on the side of
fairness to the Chinese people so Kyle
Crow is back in Shanghai his old
stomping grounds he just made a killing
on this book of Wilson's speeches his
wife Mildred isn't doing too bad herself
selling Chinese curios to all kinds of
Western buyers and did quite well for
herself in Shanghai he busied himself
meeting regularly with sun yat-sen
interviewing him and doing his best to
get the word out and then in the
afterglow of the Bolshevik Revolution
Carl crow dovin head
first right into the fray not on the
side of the Communists I my dad he was a
fervent anti-communist and extremely
distrustful about Russia's intentions in
China and he was sure Russia would stop
at nothing to ensure China converted to
communism during the post-world War one
boom Karl crow left behind the world of
journalism and propaganda and he took
stock of the situation given his
experience his connections and
everything he was as a man as a
capitalist Carl crow embarked at the
next chapter of his life he started an
advertising company called Carl crow Inc
China was about to enter own time or
more specifically Shanghai was about to
enter into a period of conspicuous
prosperity just like today where the
world depends on China's factories to
produce so many necessary finished
products and raw materials the scene was
no different in 1920 China was still a
major workshop to the world and the
exports flooded out of the port of
Shanghai wealth poured into China back
then the same way it does today the Bund
as we know it today began to take shape
great companies and manufacturing
centers grew the most famous buildings
were being built and this boomtown over
the next 20 years grew into one of the
greatest cities in the world the
post-world War 1 economy in Shanghai
anyways truly saw a period of dizzying
growth Carl crow couldn't have picked a
more opportune time to get into the
advertising biz he had already been
working at a place that translated news
stories for the Chinese press American
companies also approached him to handle
their advertising needs by having his
firm translate their ads and get them
placed in Chinese papers this business
became so big so fast that Carl crow
simply saw the future and began doing
this full-time he set up his office in
the international
settlement right off the bond the
consumer market in Shanghai was enormous
and growing fast no city in China was
more sophisticated and embraced foreign
brands more than the shanghainese so
right after World War one Shanghai takes
off like a rocket the rest of China well
we already looked at that before and we
know the CCP gets founded and China
degrades into warlordism Japanese are
keeping the pressure on especially in
the north and sun yat-sen was going to
die all too soon before his work was
finished Shanghai as we know it or
imagine it to me roaring 20s and 30s was
just beginning to take shape there
wasn't a whole lot of competition in
Shanghai for Carl crow incorporated
though he began as an advertising agency
placing ads and Chinese papers because
of the explosion of growth with the
Shanghai economy expanding in every
single direction his firm was also
called upon to also deal with requests
for market research and endless
translation jobs another business that
spontaneously arose in which Carl crow
took full advantage of was the posting
of adverts are these proto billboards
not only in Shanghai but throughout the
entire Yangtze River up to obey Carl
crow looked at the whole world of
advertising in 1920 Shanghai and knew
the illustration or images far outweigh
the importance of a copy that usually
conveyed the message the they had wanted
to convey Carl believed it was all in
the illustration and he built up one of
the strongest art departments at the
time employing the finest Chinese
illustrators of the day and with this
amazing lineup of artists and
illustrators Carl crow began what later
became one of the most iconic and
memorable leftovers of the fabled 1920s
and 30s in Shanghai he created something
that was extrude
the effective back then and today in our
modern world is still utilized by many
retail establishments to evoke an image
of the exotic and luxury this was none
other than those Art Nouveau posters of
sexy chinese girl adverts that blended
both Chinese and Western sensibilities
to promote a product surely you've all
seen one or several of these posters in
your lifetime a gorgeous modern Chinese
20-something looking all innocent but at
the same time sophisticated using her
charms to promote whatever it is the ad
wanted to promote soaps cosmetics
cigarettes you know whatever business
boomed in the 20s and Carol crow Inc at
over two dozen major accounts one of his
accounts was ponds the hand and face
cream people though still a big brand
back in the 1920s in Shanghai it was the
brand to have and it was with ponds ad
campaign that all these groundbreaking
ads began to emerge and they were wildly
received this whole idea of using
Chinese beauties illustrated by Chinese
artists who instinctively knew what
aspects of feminine beauty would appeal
to the locals I mean if it was wildly
successful right from the get-go and
this is one of the things we remember
Carl crow for he's the guy who came up
with this idea so Carl crow was by the
gogo 1920s in Shanghai full-blown
entrepreneur he had this ad agency that
was the first of its kind in China they
were red hot and fast becoming an
established part of all that pre
liberation Shanghai would become famous
for he was still in the printing
business and made money this way as well
as I said he also did translations for
other firms and in such an international
place of Shanghai the need for
translated copies of documents ads
announcements you know whatever the need
was always there so between placing ads
and the local prints on behalf of a
worldwide client base his own ad
campaigns for his blue chip clients and
all the pies that he had a finger in he
was making some major bucks Carol Krause
set up another office of his aunt agency
and my second home town the city of
ningbo back then if Carl wanted to go
from Shanghai dinging paw he'd have to
take a steamship ferry that would take
half a day 12 hours to putt-putt its way
south to ningbo nowadays you could get
from the Bund to son Janko in the center
of ningbo in two hours and 45 minutes
via the longest bridge in the world over
the hangzhou bay an ad promoting the
services of his firm went something like
this Carl crow Inc merchandising in
China we maintain the largest
organization in the Far East devoted
exclusively to advertising and can offer
the foreign manufacturer a service
covering all branches of advertising and
merchandising in all parts of China our
staff of artists copy writers and
experts in the various lines both
foreign and Chinese are able to handle
in the most efficient manner every
detail of an advertising campaign
newspapers outdoor advertising printing
I have to say I admire this guy and
everyone like him who did what he did
picked up and rolled the dice and a
faraway land took this position in China
I got hooked on the excitement saw a
place for himself there and then when
I'm to make something of himself by
carving out a niche in this world that
he had the foresight to see by the
mid-1920s Carl crow was a certified
mover and shaker in the shanghai
business community he made a lot of
money and ran a respected and successful
business that many of the giants
depended on for the services crow
provided and Carl crows experiences and
what he learned during these years in
the 20s and 30s up to the time he left
were encapsulated in a 1937 book titled
400 million customers the experiences
some happy some sad of an American in
China it was a worldwide bestseller and
essential reading for anyone and anyone
who did business in China or wanted to
get an angle on what makes Chinese tick
between the mid to late 20s in the air
he was forced to leave China when the
Japanese started bombing Shanghai in
1937 Carl crow witnessed a good share of
Chinese history he was there for the
entirety of the warlord period and
mingled with several warlords and did
business with them occasionally once
even representing the American Red Cross
and a showdown with bandits to secure
the release of hostages Carl Crowe was
sent to negotiate the release of certain
hostages among them the sister-in-law of
john d rockefeller crow obtained their
release and built up a special kind of
trust with the warlord known as sueno
however once the hostages were released
the government moved in and massacred
the the warlord and all his troops 1925
Carroll and Mildred crow divorced
despite all the carnal and delightful
temptations 1920s Shanghai had to offer
someone of Carl crows stature he
remarried a woman named helen marie
hanniger who by all accounts was quite a
gal in her day and his Paul French
mentioned in his book knew how to shake
a mean cocktail well just as you ain't
sure Kai's death sort of sparked the
warlord era in China the death of Sun
yat-sen in 1925 also meant momentous
changes this is where John kai-shek
enters on stage right and things begin
to get a little more hectic in Carl
crows Shanghai the Communists are now in
full force the party had been formed in
Shanghai in 1921 and now four years
later the Communist operators led by no
less a personage than Joe Enlai himself
are busy doing their thing in Shanghai
stirring up trouble by demanding more
fairness to workers can you imagine the
nerve and then if you recall from chp
episode 55 on the shanghai massacre in
april 1927 junk Ishak put a major damper
on the communists activities two years
later Carl crow invested in the Shanghai
Evening Post and later as more roads
were built and more cars were on the
road he invested in in a magazine called
China highways which is sort of like
this west ways magazine I get regularly
from the triple-a here in cali well the
whole act of pushing back against these
communists meant that there had to be
some show of force or secret police or
at the very least dependence on criminal
world elements to keep everything from
boiling over in any case once the
Communists have been dealt with in
Shanghai by the early 1930s Anuar and
much more deadlier force began to
threaten the established order in this
beautiful perfect world that Carl Crow
and all the rich foreigners and Shanghai
enjoyed this wasn't to last beginning in
1931 with the mukden incident or Joey
bothy Japanese army invaded northern
China there were six years between the
mukden incident and the bombing of
Shanghai which brought an abrupt halt to
Carl crows world in China it also
spelled the end of extraterritoriality
foreigners always getting their way and
pretty much the whole demise of the
treaty port system that had been in
place since the Opium War although
northern China could be said to be in a
full state of war with the Empire of
Japan you'd hardly know it from living
and working in the International
Settlement in Shanghai speculation was
rife wherever gentlemen congregated
usually in the various clubs and
watering holes frequented by the elites
the question on everyone's mind was was
there anything to fear from Japan was
there some hidden silver lining to all
these monstrous things Japan was doing
with all their businesses be safe down
in Shanghai with the fighting be limited
to the north and the whole matter of the
Communist
and how much to trust them not trust
them this too was always a topic of
discussion a lot of people didn't see
the end coming least of all Carl crow he
had watched events unfold before his
eyes in the mid 1930s and by 1937 it was
no secret that he saw the Japanese as
vultures who are ready to swoop down and
get any and all nourishment they could
off the Chinese nation so vociferous was
Carl crow in his accusations of Japanese
perfidy that he would end up on a
blacklist the Japanese were very aware
of Carl crow and knew all about his
writings in the Shanghai Evening Post he
became a marked man in August 10th 1937
all Japanese citizens were evacuated
from humko again one of the three cities
making a hoo-ha that should have alerted
everyone in Shanghai that something was
about to happen two days later a 26
vessel Japanese naval fleet shows up off
the coast of Xiang and then on the
fourteenth of August 1937 the end came
Black Saturday japan bombed shanghai and
everyone finally knew to head for the
exits one right after another the
Japanese took Shanghai hangzhou soo Joe
this is when John kai-shek bailed and
the KMT shut down the government in
Nanking and they all headed out west to
Sichuan province to the city of
Chongqing immortalized in the history
books as Chung King would followed for
the remainder of the year nineteen
thirty-seven were some of the worst
atrocities committed by Japan including
the rape of Nanjing beginning on
December 13th so in the face of this
human not to mention national tragedy
Carl crow along with five thousand or so
other Westerners all scrambled to find a
way out of the chaos Carl crow had moved
particularly fast because the Japanese
were trying to track him down hold him
accountable for all the negative press
he gave them over the years so with one
suit
case in hand each Carl and Helen crow
left China leaving a quarter century of
experiences behind including all of his
stuff they left Shanghai forever and
headed to the US by way of Manila and
Kobe then they landed in seattle in
mid-september 1937 well Carol crow is 54
years old he had lost pretty much
everything in the war but he made the
most of his situation you still had book
royalties and he could still command
nice fees speaking at various
engagements he continued to rail against
the Japanese and correctly predicted
everything Japan ended up doing between
nineteen thirty-seven and the time they
bombed pearl harbor on December 7 1941
Carl continued to write books and make a
decent living in this way he wasn't able
to live as high on the hog as he did
living the good life in Shanghai but he
got by just fine he and Helen settled
down in a home located just north of
Manhattan in pelham manor in 1939 Carl
crow is itching to see some action
Liberty magazine paid him to accept an
assignment that would take him to
Rangoon in Burma Myanmar where he would
travel the 620 miles of the Burma Road
to Chongqing and report on the situation
there and this he did he made it to
rangoon and took that tortuous path
North even today this isn't a ride for
the squeamish so you can imagine back in
1939 how perilous this trip was
especially for an overweight man
certainly passed his physical prime like
Carl crow he made it there and duly
reported what he saw and heard he not
only got to interview John kai-shek and
so nailing AKA Madame Chiang he also got
to meet an interview Joe and lie who was
living in Chongqing at the time and
serving as the ambassador so to speak
between the KMT and ccp Joanne line
never failed to impress anyone and was
clearly a class act when it came to
meeting foreigners
he spent two hours with Carol crow
answering all his questions in English
without the need for an interpreter
Carol Krause said of Joe and lie he was
quote the most interesting man I have
met in Chongqing not even accepting the
Generalissimo Carol crow was most
impressed with Joe and lie and this
offered up quite a contradiction to his
extreme pro kmt anti-ccp leanings well
with this assignment in the bag Carl
crow left Chongqing and headed back home
to the US by way of kunming Hanoi and
London he spent the rest of that year
nineteen thirty-nine giving talks and
speeches and in general acting the role
of the China hand during a time when
China was on a lot of people's minds in
1940 he took a long Latin American tour
writing his thoughts down and later
publishing a book on his travels and
observations the following year 1941 his
beloved Helen died and he moved out of
the residence in pelham manor after
japan bombed Pearl Harbor Carl crow went
to work for the US government's office
of War Information which was neck-deep
and propaganda to sway US public opinion
and get people to think the right way he
worked for the legendary China hand Owen
Lattimore who we are going to feature as
a topic one day in the in a future China
history podcast oh and ladamar of course
the man credited with coining the term
McCarthyism after his war service Carl
crow remained in Manhattan writing and
living by himself with a single man
servant he still enjoyed the company of
those who shared his rich experience in
China and this is how he lived out the
rest of his days that tragically were
fast approaching a June eighth nineteen
forty-five Carl crow died of the same
disease that took mr. Christopher
Hitchens from us all too soon in
December last year succumbing to
esophageal cancer he was buried in
fredericktown Missouri an odd fellow
teri next to his parents and that my
friends is a story of mr. Carl crow
perhaps forgotten to most but his
amazing life i thought was certainly
worth retelling he left behind a whole
bunch of books including of course the
Evergreen 400 million customers I bought
a few of his books on Amazon and i'll be
reading them the days to come i bought
his book written by crow called foreign
Devils in the flowery kingdom which
looks like it will be totally enjoyable
if you liked this story and want to read
more I urge you to purchase Paul
French's biography of Carl crow I use
this book as my main resource to tell
this story I left out about ninety-five
percent of the detail so go look for
that if you're interested Paul French
also recently published what looks to be
a good read it's titled midnight and
Peking how the murder of a young
Englishwoman haunted the last days of
old China that's published by penguin
Viking that will be a most def purchase
when I get around to it okay this is my
formal announcement the old feed in
itunes the one with the image of sun
yat-sen I'm pulling the plug on that
next week no sense in having to fees I
still get emails from listeners asking
why it has been updated and so long the
reason is because I'm not updating it
anymore obviously if you're listening to
this you're subscribed to the correct
fade if you remember from the robert
hart episode i mentioned that dr. mary
tiffin would be publishing her work on
Robert Hart titled friends of Sir Robert
heart three generations of Carol women
in China I have duly ordered it hot off
the presses in England can't wait to
read it you can get the book off her
website at Tiffany a books com t iff
enia books com i'll put that link on my
website and also add it to the list of
books in the ever-growing CHP library
last announcement my podcasting brother
Ray Harris of the always popular and
highly ranked
30 world war two podcasts have a heart
all youse guys frustrated with the
recent dearth of episodes ray lives out
one of the most beautiful regions of the
USA in central Virginia the only
downside living out in the country is
there aren't a whole lot of ISPs there
and when the one and only link to
cyberspace closes down and moves out it
presents quite a challenge and trust me
when I say it isn't easy to operate a
history podcast production from a
smartphone and constant hikes to
internet cafes and libraries so this
situation is being bravely dealt with by
brother ray he had another great one
last week number 48 so hang in there and
be patient prosperity is just around the
corner don't forget what promises to be
one of the great history tours of a
lifetime check it out at World War two
podcast net that too is written as I I
so it would be World War III podcast
dotnet go check it out and that my
friends is that I know I've gone on
longer than usual I hope you were able
to suffer through till the very end this
is your host and humble narrator less on
Montgomery signing off from beautiful
and I mean beautiful today claremont
california right on the edge of LA
county i hope you'll join me next week
for another exciting episode of the
china history podcast